 A Cross-Strait China Summit 

Beijing may be trying to pressure Taiwan’s likely next president.
The People’s Republic of China has threatened Taiwan with invasion since the end of the civil war in 1949. It has renewed those threats in recent years while demanding progress toward reunification. And for more than two decades Beijing has refused Taipei’s offers of a summit between the two sides. So why has China’s Communist Party Secretary Xi Jinping suddenly agreed to meet President Ma Ying-jeou—apparently without preconditions?
The timing suggests Beijing may want to influence the outcome of Taiwan’s Jan. 16 Presidential and legislative elections. Mr. Ma’s Kuomintang party, which favors eventual reunification with the mainland, is almost certain to lose the Presidency and possibly control of the legislature to the pro-independence Democratic Progressive Party. In theory a breakthrough in cross-Strait ties could benefit the KMT.
But it would have to be a huge breakthrough. It’s more likely the summit will hurt the KMT, since voters are suspicious of Mr. Ma’s intentions. The improvement in cross-Strait relations during the President’s seven-year tenure has led to accusations that he has been selling out the island’s autonomy. His disapproval rating hovers near 70%.
Beijing’s past efforts to influence Taiwanese elections have backfired, often in spectacular fashion. In 1996 Chinese forces fired ballistic missiles near Taiwan’s major ports to deter voters from backing Lee Teng-hui, who won in a landslide. In 2000 Premier Zhu Rongji threatened serious consequences if Taiwanese voted for Chen Shui-bian, helping him to victory.
But there is another possible explanation for Mr. Xi’s initiative. Given that the DPP’s Tsai Ying-wen is likely to be Taiwan’s next President, Beijing has a few more months to restrict her freedom to maneuver. The summit sets a powerful precedent. It suggests that Beijing is now willing to engage directly with Taiwan’s leader, as long as that leader refrains from pushing a pro-independence agenda. The summit may be a tacit recognition that China’s high-handedness and insistence on isolating Taiwan from the international community has alienated the majority of Taiwanese, who favor keeping the status quo but also want to see improved cross-Strait ties.
Beijing has tried to win over Taiwanese with economic benefits such as preferential access to the mainland’s booming economy. Direct air, sea and mail links have made life easier for businesspeople with investments on the mainland.
But even as President Ma reaped these benefits, a backlash toward the mainland has been building. A student protest movement took over the legislature building after the cross-Strait trade deal was pushed through in 2014. Suspicion of Beijing’s intentions has forced Mr. Ma to criticize China’s human-rights record and promise to protect the island’s sovereignty. He has turned down the mainland’s requests for political talks about eventual reunification.
With Saturday’s summit, Beijing now suggests it is willing to consider treating Taiwan on more respectful terms in return for progress toward reunification. Should Ms. Tsai become President, it can easily seize on her policies or statements to declare that she has betrayed the new consensus forged with Mr. Ma.
It’s possible that Mr. Xi genuinely wants to try a different tack toward Taiwan. If so, that would be real progress. The likelier bet is that the summit is part of a strategy to put Taiwan’s next administration under pressure.
